---
layout: post
title: Civic Tech and Government Infrastructure
---

In 2020, I graduated from a relatively unconventional graduate program at the University of Chicago called [Computational Analysis and Public Policy](https://capp.uchicago.edu/) (CAPP). I'm very fortunate and grateful that during a global pandemic, I managed to find employment as a data scientist with the Census Bureau, and am even more fortunate that the salary and benefits package is actually competitive with those in the private sector. There is a ton of [content](https://www.ted.com/talks/catherine_bracy_why_good_hackers_make_good_citizens) [on the internet](https://www.ted.com/talks/jennifer_pahlka_coding_a_better_government) [in the form of](https://www.ted.com/talks/clay_shirky_how_the_internet_will_one_day_transform_government) [TED talks alone](https://www.ted.com/talks/pia_mancini_how_to_upgrade_democracy_for_the_internet_era) that talk about the need for a workforce to advance the use of technology in the government, so I'm not going to go into that in this post. I do, however, have some personal reflections on how 6 months of a new, fully remote civic tech job in a pandemic is going. As all things that I intend for this blog, maybe it'll be useful for some mysterious reader out there, but mostly it'll be something interesting for me to look back on. I think this topic is going to warrant several posts. Today, I focus on my experiences with government infrastructure.

## The reality of government infrastructure

I have a little anecdote to tell about day 0 on the job. I knew I would have to do at least SOME prep prior to day 1, given that the job was originally intended to be in person. I renegotiated my start date to occur earlier than the initial agreed upon date. As a result, I had not located from Chicago to the DMV area yet, and so had not picked up a work laptop. I knew I would have to set up some tech on my personal laptop at the very least. (I won't even go into the long, arduous process of getting my SSS clearance to work for the federal government.)

So I get an email from a Census rep with some instructions to follow to get started. I click on all the links for instructions, all are unacessible. Eventually, between browsing all the links I was sent and googling things, I figure out how to set up Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) on my own using some Census credentials I'd been given. I then try and access that same email within my VDI. Turns out the instructions I was given were about how to set up VDI (the very thing I just figured out myself), and those very instructions were only accessible within VDI. Wonderful.

## Maintaining motivation

This kind of story repeats itself in a different context on a regular basis, and everyone at Census will tell you that's normal Census stuff. Granted, any private sector job would also have some level of bureaucracy and technical infrastructure limitations, but in government it becomes such a common occurrence that it gets hard to believe you can convince the powers that be to change things for the better. There's no "moving fast" and there's no "breaking things". It's more like pitching an idea, putting in tickets to download software to create an MVP, getting approvals from task forces to implement it, finding out who you need to talk to to get another approval needed for the current approval, etc., etc.

I think people get into civic tech, and even public service more broadly, because they want to be the ones to make the change. And that, in a way, is what motivates me every time I come across something that is frustrating about the technical infrastructure I've been provided for my job. In reality, it's not as bad as being a frustrated resident who has to jump through hoops to access basic information about their community. Me overcoming infrastructure challenges at my job is part of the process of helping that resident access what they need more easily. And I get paid pretty well for it! That's a privilege I hope not to take for granted in 2021.
